
If you don't remember your password, you can reset it by entering your email address and clicking the Reset Password button. You will then receive an email that contains a secure link for resetting your password
If the address matches a valid account an email will be sent to __email__ with instructions for resetting your password
Please enter a term before submitting your search.

World No Tobacco Day: Global Burden of Disease Study

IPA Congress 2019: register with The Lancet Conference Content Centre for access to Editors' Choice articles to coincide with the 29th International Pediatric Association Congress
Progress in adolescent health and wellbeing: tracking 12 headline indicators for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2016
Growth trajectories of breastfed HIV-exposed uninfected and HIV-unexposed children under conditions of universal maternal antiretroviral therapy
Improving lives by accelerating progress towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals for adolescents living with HIV
Urgent mental health issues in adolescents
View articles of the highest standard and extending to all aspects of human health
View collections of articles, reviews, seminars and comments from across our journals
View selected content around 136 diseases according to clinical practice needs
View selected content to advance health in all regions of the world
Pain is the most common reason people seek health care and the leading cause of disability in the world. Chronic pain has been defined as pain that persists or recurs for longer than 3 months, and it exerts an enormous personal and economic burden, affecting more than 30% of people worldwide. Even controlling for higher rates of depression, suicide, and opioid use, chronic pain is associated with a lower life expectancy.   The biopsychosocial model views pain as the denouement of a dynamic interaction among biological, psychological, and social factors. Indiscriminately prescribing medications and doing procedures based simply on a diagnosis or on symptoms will unnecessarily increase the risk:benefit ratio of therapy. This Series of three articles synthesise recent findings across specialties, focusing on those with important implications for health-care providers and patients.
The rapid economic growth in China has been accompanied by alarming rise in obesity. Recent National survey data suggest that more than half of Chinese adults are now living with overweight and obesity, with obesity rates likely to increase.This three-paper Series provides an examination of the epidemiology,  highlights the advances and future directions of the clinical management and treatment, and discusses current health policies and public health implications of obesity in China. China now faces important choices. Only by understanding the challenges of obesity in China can successful prevention and management strategies and policies be devised and implemented.
Women’s reproductive, maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health (RMNCAH) is a cornerstone for the healthy development of the next generation and a driving force for the progress of population and society in the future, especially in this era of population ageing and low fertility in China. Led by an international collaboration of experts, this Commission looks at progress over the past decades and emerging challenges for RMNCAH in China. It proposes a strategic framework to achieve RMNCAH-related targets for the SDGs and Healthy China 2030 that encompasses four essential drivers: financing, workforce development, medicine and technology, and information technology systems. The recommendations proposed by the Commission are essential to improve access, equity, and quality of RMNCAH services, to build a healthy and friendly environment for every woman, child, and adolescent domestically, and improve global governance in RMNCAH.
Despite being responsible for causing 35% of deaths in women each year, cardiovascular disease (CVD) in women remains understudied, under-recognised, under-diagnosed, and under-treated, with women under-represented in clinical trials. To tackle these inequities, 17 experts from 11 countries have authored the first-ever global report on CVD in women. The all -female-led Commission outlines 10 ambitious new recommendations to tackle inequities intargeting diagnosis, treatment, and prevention to reduce CVD in women, including educating health care providers and patients on early detection to prevent heart disease in women; scaling up heart health programs in highly populated and underdeveloped regions; and prioritising sex-specific research on heart disease in women and intervention strategies for women.
The Lancet sets extremely high standards. We select only the best research papers for their quality of work and the progression they bring.
Too much research is done for research sake. We believe that improving lives is the only end goal and that research is only relevant when it has an impact on human lives.
We recognise that a great research paper is not enough and that it requires development, mobilisation, and exposure. So we promise to set agendas, create context, inform leaders, start debates, and advocate for the idea that research can and will make a difference.

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. To update your cookie settings, please visit the Cookie Preference Center for this site.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. except certain content provided by third parties. The content on this site is intended for healthcare professionals.


Privacy Policy   Terms and Conditions




