
Industrial Management & Data Systems



ISSN:
                    0263-5577



Article publication date: 30 March 2020






Issue publication date: 4 May 2020

This study aims to investigate the determinants of successful implementation of cloud computing and, further, examines how cloud computing success influences firm performance.
The authors developed a conceptual framework based on the integration of several strands of literature in business studies and information systems. To test the proposed model, data were collected from 300 Chinese firms which have adopted cloud computing. To analyze the data, partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) was used. An importance-performance map analysis (IPMA) was also conducted to identify the critical factors that exhibit high importance but low performance.
The results of the study revealed that end-user satisfaction, information quality, system quality, managerial information technology (IT) capability and technical IT capability significantly affect cloud computing success. Additionally, cloud computing success has a strong and positive impact on firm performance. IPMA further confirms that managers need to concentrate more on system quality, information quality, user satisfaction and technical IT capability.
This paper is one of the few attempts to integrate several theoretical frameworks (i.e. IT capabilities and resource-based view, expectation-confirmation theory, and information system success theory) to develop a comprehensive model for understanding the key determinants of cloud computing success and its impact on firm performance. This study makes a useful contribution to the conventional information systems (IS) literature and IT management practice.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [71810107003].

Khayer, A., Bao, Y. and Nguyen, B. (2020), "Understanding cloud computing success and its impact on firm performance: an integrated approach", Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 120 No. 5, pp. 963-985. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-06-2019-0327

Emerald Publishing Limited

        Copyright © 2020, Emerald Publishing Limited

Report bugs here
Please share your general feedback
You can join in the discussion by joining the community or logging in here.You can also find out more about Emerald Engage.
Visit emeraldpublishing.com/platformupdate to discover the latest news and updates
Answers to the most commonly asked questions here
